---
title: RSS
published_at: 2016-01-10T17:37:07Z
---

I once read RSS described as the "Internet's long-tail of content", implying
that although the "big" links at any given time are readily available from any
of aggregator or social community because their popularity is a cascading
effect, RSS enables the discovery of content that might have otherwise gone
unseen.

I've been a heavy RSS user for years now, originally with Google Reader, and
then jumping to Feedly after its demise. I'd consider myself a major proponent
of the platform, and would love to see that utopian world where the majority of
the population ingested content via a collection of distributed feeds under
their own control instead of letting Facebook's timeline spoonfeed them
whatever its algorithm dredged up for the day. That said, even though RSS shows
no sign of disappearing anytime soon, we can say with pretty good certainty
that it's never going to be widely successful either. A lot of that is probably
because it's too difficult for an average user to understand and use, but at
least some of the fault lies with the technology itself, and that's caused
attrition among even its most technically-competent users.

Here are a few major weaknesses in RSS today:

* **Overwhelming volume:** The number of articles published in an RSS feed is
  entirely at the discretion of the content creator and larger outlets tend to
  publish more volume. Very large publishers often push out as many feed items
  just by themselves as dozens of smaller sources combined, and reading the
  whole feed or even just sifting through it for the best content is untenable.
  Major periodicals produce some of the best content out there, but almost all
  of them suffer from this problem very severely. For example, the New York
  Times writes great stories, but their main feed publishes on the order of 50
  items a day.
* **Lack of curation:** A possible solution to the problem of volume described
  above is to split content into separate channels so that users can follow a
  smaller feed that still has content relevant to them, but with a less frantic
  pace (which may be keyed to a particulr topic or city). But even here,
  readers must still rely on appropriate curation by the publisher, who has
  incentive to publish all their content rather than just what's the most
  relevant or highest quality. Two examples of feeds that I had to unsubscribe
  from for this reason are _Streetsblog_ and the _AWS Official Blog_, both of
  which were ostensibly subchannels that were keyed to topics I cared about
  (San Francisco for the former and AWS announcements for the latter), but both
  of which had very low signal to noise ratios in reality [1] [2].
* **Poor quality feeds:** A commonly seen problem are feeds that force readers
  to link to the original article by truncating content available in the RSS
  body. Although sensible for some publishers in that it probably improves ad
  impressions, this "breaks" RSS as a platform by making content very onerous
  to consume. And speaking of ads, another way to significantly degrade feed
  quality is to include them in the content body; obviously an advantage for
  the publisher, but one that wholly compromises the reading experience.

The theme common to all these problems is that content providers actually have
too much control

RSS feed "ratings"?

[1] _Streetsblog_ allows you to subscribe to a city blog (say San Francisco),
but even there still cross-posts with all kinds of irrelevant content to fill
up the feed.

[2] The _AWS Official Blog_ does indeed contain important announcements related
to major new products and features, but also mixes in trivial updates and
filler. An especially heinous offender are the "AWS Week in Review" posts,
which allow you to re-read all the content that you just read.
