---
title: "Tweeting for 10,000 Years: An Experiment in
  Autonomous Software"
published_at: 2018-07-20T13:41:22Z
location: San Francisco
hook: Using the design principles of a 10,000 year clock to
  build a program that's intended to run on a macro
  timescale.
---

Deep inside a mountain in Texas, a clock is being built.
Unlike other clocks, this one is designed to outlast every
other invention of humankind, carefully engineered to
maximize longevity on a scale of time that's
incompatible with our most fundamental intuitions.

The counterweight for its drive mechanism is housed in a
hollowed out shaft that's 500 feet high and 12 feet in
diameter. It's the size of a small car and weighs an
unbelievable 10,000 pounds. The clock's periodic chimes are
controlled by 20 huge gears stacked on top of one another
-- each of which is 8 feet in diameter. It keeps time
through a 6-foot pendulum assembly terminating with
football-sized titanium weights that swing as unhurriedly
as one might imagine from such a leviathan, taking a full
ten seconds to move all the way back and forth. Components
are machined to within tolerances of a fraction of an inch,
rather than thousandths of an inch common in similar
devices, so that they'll keep working as time takes its
inevitable toll through expansion and rust.

!fig src="/assets/10000-years/orrery.jpg" caption="The design of the orrery to be used in the 10,000 year clock. It shows the relative position of six human-eye visible planets in our solar system."

If all goes well, the clock will keep time for 10,000
years. It's called the "[Clock of the Long Now][clock]" and
is a project of the [Long Now Foundation][longnow], who aim
to foster that values long-term planning and
responsibility, and counteract what seems to be an
accelerating trend towards an ever shortening attention
span that we see in society today. Their scale is one of
centuries and millennia, and they aim to construct
frameworks that will be functional for 10,000 years and
beyond. As a reminder of this charter, the Long Now
represents years in five digits instead of four -- under
their calendaring system, it's the year 02018.

## How to tweet as long as possible (#tweeting)

Software may not be as well suited as a finely engineered
clock to operate on these sorts of geological scales, but
that doesn't mean we can't try to put some of the 10,000
year clock's design principles to work. As seen by the
short functional lifetime of most software, and its
tendency to continually complexify and bloat, our industry
is one that's reliably short-sighted when it comes to
building products that will last.

Software does have some advantages for longevity compared
to a mechanical apparatus. Especially in the age of the
cloud, a well-designed program isn't dependent on any
single host. It can be moved around as the hardware below
it succumbs to the physical realities of entropy, and rely
on its underlying platform to stay stable thanks to the
efforts of human maintainers.

I wanted to write a little experiment inspired by the
10,000 year clock to see how long I could make a simple
program last without my intervention. It's called
[Perpetual][perpetual], and it has the simple task of
posting a total of ten pre-configured tweets to my timeline
on something close to an exponential scale; the last being
very optimistically scheduled to fire 10,000 years from
now. The first of them went out just a few minutes after
this article was published.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">LHI000: I put together a few words on what we can learn in software about resilience and long term thinking from the design principles of a 10,000 year clock.<a href="https://t.co/lUOK8IJpsV">https://t.co/lUOK8IJpsV</a></p>&mdash; Brandur (@brandur) <a href="https://twitter.com/brandur/status/1020320298569293824?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">July 20, 2018</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

Each tweet, or "interval", is prefixed with a magic string
and number like **LHI001** (LHI stands for "long heartbeat
interval") so that the scheduled tweets are recognizable,
and so that the program can easily find the last one that
it published. Here's the intended timeline:

<figure>
  <div class="table-container">
    <table class="overflowing">
      <tr>
        <th>Interval #</th>
        <th>Tweet prefix</th>
        <th>Scheduled time</th>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">0</td>
        <td align="center">LHI000</td>
        <td align="center">Today</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">1</td>
        <td align="center">LHI001</td>
        <td align="center">1 day (from now)</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">2</td>
        <td align="center">LHI002</td>
        <td align="center">1 week</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">3</td>
        <td align="center">LHI003</td>
        <td align="center">1 month</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">4</td>
        <td align="center">LHI004</td>
        <td align="center">1 year</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">5</td>
        <td align="center">LHI005</td>
        <td align="center">5 years</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">6</td>
        <td align="center">LHI006</td>
        <td align="center">10 years</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">7</td>
        <td align="center">LHI007</td>
        <td align="center">100 years</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">8</td>
        <td align="center">LHI008</td>
        <td align="center">1,000 years</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">9</td>
        <td align="center">LHI009</td>
        <td align="center">10,000 years</td>
      </tr>
    </table>
  </div>
  <figcaption>The scheduled publication time for each tweet/interval.</figcaption>
</figure>

And here's the code that checks for old intervals and
decides whether a new one should be posted (somewhat
simplified for brevity):

``` go
func Update(api TwitterAPI, intervals []*Interval, now time.Time)
        (int, error) {

    it := api.ListTweets()

    for it.Next() {
        lastTweet = it.Value()

        id, ok = extractIntervalID(lastTweet.Message)
        if ok {
            break
        }
    }

    if it.Err() != nil {
        return -1, it.Err()
    }

    var nextIntervalID int
    if ok {
        // Pick the next interval in the series
        nextIntervalID = id + 1
    } else {
        // If ok is false, we never extracted an interval ID, which
        // means that this program has never posted before. Pick the
        // first interval ID in the series.
        nextIntervalID = 0
    }

    if nextIntervalID >= len(intervals) {
        return -1, nil
    }

    interval := intervals[nextIntervalID]

    if interval.Target.After(now) {
        fmt.Printf("Interval not ready, target: %v\n", interval.Target)
        return -1, nil
    }

    tweet, err := api.PostTweet(
        formatInterval(nextIntervalID, interval.Message))
    if err != nil {
        return -1, err
    }

    return nextIntervalID, nil
}
```

## Time and scale (#time)

It's a cute idea, but as you may have already guessed, my
program won't be tweeting for 10,000 years. It'll be lucky
if it makes it to 10 years, and lucky beyond all reason if
it makes it to 100 (more on this in [Existential
threats](#threats) below). Humans tend to have a hard time
imagining increasing orders of magnitude, a fact that's
demonstrated by the well-documented cognitive bias of
[scope insensitivity][insensitivity]. We can all do the
basic arithmetic that tells us there are 1,000 ten year
segments in 10,000, but it's difficult to appreciate how
much more time that really is. After some size, all
numbers, whether they're a thousand, ten thousand, a
million, or ten million, are just _really big_.

Consider that the oldest pyramid, the Pyramid of Djoser at
Saqqara, isn't quite 5,000 years old, and that's _ancient_.
As young Cleopatra, and who lived contemporaneously with
some of history's other most famous figures like Julius
Caesar, Mark Antony, and Augustus, looked up the huge stone
monuments that were her country's legacy, consider that
they'd been constructed further back in history for her
(she was born 69 BC) than she is back in history for us in
2018. There are a few human artifacts from as far back as
10,000 years ago, but they mostly amount to nothing more
than fragments of pots.

But just because the program is unlikely to succeed on its
10,000 year mission doesn't mean that we can't try to
improve its chances.

!fig src="/assets/10000-years/monolith.jpg" caption="We have many artifacts from ancient humanity, but 10,000 years predates almost all of them."

## Hedging against failure (#hedging)

The program's goal for longevity is extremely ambitious, so
it's engineered with a number of features that aim to
protect it against the decaying forces of time and make it
as minimally prone to failure:

* It runs on a **serverless** architecture to insulate it
  against failures in underlying infrastructure. If a
  single server were to die, it would just be run somewhere
  else. Its platform will also get regular updates for
  security and stability.

* That platform is **AWS Lambda**, a service provided by a
  big company (Amazon) that's more likely than others to be
  long-lived. It also has a reliable history of _not_
  retiring products, and making relatively few breaking
  changes.

* It has **no persistent state** of its own, and instead
  relies entirely on state returned from Twitter's API.
  Databases are especially prone to aging and operational
  problems, and not including one improves the program's
  chances.

* In the spirit of [production minimalism](/minimalism),
  there are **very few moving parts**: just the program
  itself, Twitter's API, and the underlying serverless
  platform.

* **I'm using Go**. As described in [Go on
  Lambda](/go-lambda#tenacity), its 1.x series has a
  remarkable history of longevity and near perfect
  backwards compatibility. Even if Go 2 were to be
  released, I expect that there's a good chance that my
  program would work with it.

* Relatedly, Go is a **statically typed language** which
  means that the code I wrote is more likely to actually
  work compared to if it'd been written in an interpreted
  language where many problems only appear at runtime. I've
  also included a **comprehensive test suite**.

* The program compiles down to a **self-contained binary**
  and won't be as susceptible to breakage by a change in
  its underlying bootstrap or dependencies (compared to say
  Ruby, where an eventual upgrade to Bundler could mean
  that your program no longer starts).

## Existential threats (#threats)

Over this kind of timeline, the program faces many
existential threats. One of them will knock it offline
eventually, with the only question being: which one?

* Maybe the most common of all failures is an
  **application bug**. I've tried to protect against this
  pitfall through testing, but I could've easily overlooked
  a subtle edge case.

* Changes in **Twitter's API** could spell the end. This
  would take the form of a backwards-incompatible change
  like a new required parameter, change in the structure of
  responses, or adjustment to how applications authenticate.

* Relatedly, changes in **Twitter's product** are also
  dangerous. They could move to a new pricing model,
  remodel the product's core design, or fold as a company.

* Risks on **AWS** are similar. There's a minimal API that Go
  programs on Lambda use to communicate with the service,
  and that could change. The Lambda product could be
  retired. I've set up the program to be able to run only
  on free tier, but that could change, or the account it's
  running under could become otherwise delinquent.

* If left running long enough, **the binary** I've upload
  to Lambda might become incompatible with the underlying
  virtual and hardware infrastructure through changes in
  machine code or low level operating system APIs. It would
  need to be recompiled with a newer version of Go to work
  again.

I'd personally bet that it will be changes in Twitter's API
that will take the program down in the end. Their API has
been stable for some time, but has accumulated its share of
rough edges over the years. It stands to reason that
Twitter eventually undertake a project to revitalize it,
and the chances are that will be the end of the current API
after some deprecation period that's likely to span a
maximum of a handful of years.

## What we can learn from a clock (#learn)

A core set of [guiding principles][principles] were devised
to help design the 10,000 year clock:

* **Longevity:** The clock should be accurate even after
  10,000 years, and must not contain valuable parts (such
  as jewels, expensive metals, or special alloys) that
  might be looted.

* **Maintainability:** Future generations should be able
  to keep the clock working, if necessary, with nothing
  more advanced than Bronze Age tools and materials.

* **Transparency:** The clock should be understandable
  without stopping or disassembling it; no functionality
  should be opaque.

* **Evolvability:** It should be possible to improve the
  clock over time.

* **Scalability:** It should be possible to build working
  models of the clock from table-top to monumental size
  using the same design.

### Rethought for software (#software)

The Long Now describe the principles above as "generally
good for designing anything to last a long time," and they
are, even when it comes to software. It doesn't take much
creativity to rethink them as a set of values that could
help guide our industry. I'd phrase them like this:

* **Longevity:** Software should be written as robustly as
  possible to maximize longevity. Consider edge cases, test
  comprehensively, and use statically typed languages.
  Avoid dependencies that are complex or brittle.

* **Maintainability:** Use frameworks that will make
  software easily maintainable by developers who come after
  you. Development should only require a minimal toolchain,
  and one that's demonstrated a good history of stability
  and support.

* **Transparency:** Write code simply and elegantly. Use
  abstractions, but don't abstract so heavily as to
  obfuscate. It should be obvious how code works not only
  to you, but for any others who might read it in the
  future.

* **Evolvability:** It should be possible to improve
  software over time. A good compiler and test suite should
  let future developers who aren't deeply familiar with the
  existing code make those improvements safely.

* **Scalability:** To ensure that production software
  will work properly, write an extensive test suite and
  deploy the prototype in high-fidelity pre-production
  environments before taking it live.


Software tends to stay in operation longer than we think it
will when we first wrote it, and the wearing effects of
entropy within it and its ecosystem often take their toll
more quickly and more destructively than we could imagine.
You don't need to be thinking on a scale of 10,000 years to
make applying these principles a good idea.

[clock]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clock_of_the_Long_Now
[insensitivity]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scope_neglect
[longnow]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Long_Now_Foundation
[perpetual]: https://github.com/brandur/perpetual
[principles]: http://longnow.org/clock/principles/
