---
title: Learning From Terminals to Design the Future of User Interfaces
published_at: 2017-01-28T13:24:00Z
location: San Francisco
hook: How we overvalue the wrong technology and novel
  aspects of interface design at the expense of substantial
  gains to our productivity.
hn_link: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=17682494
# or, older post:
# hn_link: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=13733777
---

I was recently called out on Twitter for claiming that
Electron-based Slack, with three teams configured,
regularly takes 30+ seconds to load. They claimed that I
was either committing gross hyperbole, or the victim of
some localized problem. I responded by sending over a video
of me opening Slack and loading each of my teams in
succession. It was 45 seconds long. _My_ claim is that this
sort of loading time isn't unusual at all. It's just that
we're all used to it.

<figure>
  <p>
    <video controls loop class="overflowing">
      <source src="/assets/interfaces/slack-45s.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    </video>
  </p>
  <figcaption>This is a video of me waiting for Slack
    configured with three teams to fully load. It's 45
    seconds long.</figcaption>
</figure>

Modern applications and interfaces frustrate me. In today's
world every one of us has the awesome power of the greatest
computers in human history in our pockets and at our desks.
The computational capacity at our finger tips would have
been unimaginable even to the most audacious thinkers of
thirty years ago.

These powerful devices should be propelling our workflows
forward with us gangly humans left barely able to keep up,
and yet, almost without exception we wait for our computers
instead of the other way around. We're conditioned
ourselves to think that waiting 30+ seconds for an app to
load, or interrupting our workflow to watch a half second
animations a thousand times a day, are perfectly normal.

## The rise of the web (#rise-of-the-web)

<figure>
  <p>
    <img src="/assets/interfaces/yahoo-1995.jpg" class="overflowing">
  </p>
  <figcaption>Yahoo circa 1995.</figcaption>
</figure>

Somewhere around the late 90s or early 00s we made the
decision to jump ship from desktop apps and start writing
the lion's share of new software for the web. This was
largely for pragmatic reasons: the infrastructure to talk
to a remote server became possible for the first time, good
cross platform UI frameworks had always been elusive beasts
[1], and desktop development frameworks were intimidating
compared to more approachable languages like Perl and PHP.

The other reason was cosmetic: HTML and CSS gave developers
total visual control over what their interfaces looked
like, allowing them to brand them and build experiences
that were pixel-perfect according to their own ends. This
seemed like a big improvement over more limiting desktop
development, but it led us to the world we have today
where every interface is a different size and shape, and
the common display conventions that we used to have to aid
with usability have become distant memories of the past.

Today, web apps are still being hailed as the future. With
the possible exception of mobile, most software companies
are building their products for the web, and even when
they're not, web technology is considered a reasonable
alternative for the desktop. Vocal groups proclaim that
Electron-based apps convey huge benefits compared to
traditional options in productivity and flexibility, and
are the way forward for all desktop software.

I'm not on a mission to demean this technology, but as it's
continually augmented with ever more unwieldy retrofits,
there's a widening disparity between what we can build with
it compared to the best-written native apps. Software on
the web today takes too long to load, depends too heavily
on synchronous calls to slow networks, overemphasizes
visual gimmickry, and lacks the refinement that allows
mastery by more experienced users to gain huge leverage for
productivity's sake.

## The worst kept secret (#worst-kept-secret)

In 2007, after releasing the iPhone, Steve Jobs told
developers that they could all write apps for the iPhone
_today_ ... as long as they did it in HTML5. To his credit,
he reversed his position inside a year after realizing how
compromised the web experience was compared to native
options.

In 2012, Mark Zuckerberg ignited JavaScript proponents
everywhere after announcing that Facebook's biggest mobile
mistake was focusing on HTML5. Meanwhile, consumers
everywhere celebrated as they were given a native app that
was far faster and more responsive.

Every one of us knows that when it comes to a smartphone,
we'd use a native app over an in-browser HTML5 any day of
the week. Yet when it comes to the desktop, we're still
using Gmail, Reddit, Trello, and JIRA. Computers and
networks tend to be fast enough that this software is "good
enough". Tellingly though, we avoid this software whenever
better options are available, like with our terminals and
text editors.

## Not just technology (#not-just-technology)

Web technology isn't conducive to fast and efficient UIs,
but that's not the only problem we're facing. Somewhere
along the way UX designers became addicted to catchy, but
superfluous, interface effects.

Think of all the animations that an average user sits
through in a day: switching between spaces in Mac OS,
1Password's unlock, waiting for iOS to show the SpringBoard
after hitting the home button, entering full screen from a
Mac OS app, or switching between tabs in mobile Safari.

<figure>
  <p>
    <video controls loop class="overflowing">
      <source src="/assets/interfaces/1password.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    </video>
  </p>
  <figcaption>1Password's unlock animation. The stuttering
    isn't a problem with the video on this page; it's
    actually how the animation looks.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
  <p>
    <video controls loop class="overflowing">
      <source src="/assets/interfaces/spaces.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    </video>
  </p>
  <figcaption>OS X Spaces, introduced in Leopard. A
    nominally useful feature, but the mandatory animations
    make them slow and unwieldy.</figcaption>
</figure>

I liked every one of them the first time. The next five
thousand times were less impressive. And the same goes for
all the flourishes in this class -- they look great in
screenshots and demos, but don't advance our ability to be
productive; in fact, they do the opposite.

<figure>
  <p>
    <img src="/assets/interfaces/cmd-tab.png" data-rjs="2" class="overflowing">
  </p>
  <figcaption>Will Cmd + Tab be the next victim of
    overzealous animation?</figcaption>
</figure>

I live in fear that one day Apple will realize that they've
left a gaping hole in their UX strategy and that task
switches from Cmd + Tab should be animated. Multiply that
animation's length by the average number of task switches
per day by the number of users by their cost per second,
and you'd be able to see that millions of dollars a year in
global productivity has evaporated overnight.

Animations are a particularly egregious visual gimmick, but
there are others: whitespace so extravagant that only a
minute amount of content can fit on the screen, overly
large font sizes, submenus where a row of links would do
just as well, unlabeled icons that look neat but leave
their users guessing as to what they do, fixed headers that
obscure content. The list goes on.

## ThemWare (#themware)

<figure>
  <p>
    <video controls loop class="overflowing">
      <source src="/assets/interfaces/terminal.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    </video>
  </p>
  <figcaption>Contrary to any "modern" interfaces, a
    terminal is fast and responsive. There are no animations
    or other superfluous visual baggage.</figcaption>
</figure>

Many of us developers are building web applications for
other people while simultaneously eschewing them ourselves
as much as we possibly can. While our users move at glacial
speeds through pages on the web, we're sitting in terminal
environments that aren't just fast, but come with the
promise of incredible advancements in productivity to
anyone willing to spend the time to master them.

Here's why I like using terminals and terminal programs:

* Startup/loading time is negligible.

* Time to transition between different screens is
  instantaneous (no animations in sight).

* Interface elements are limited, but uniform.

* The learning curve is steep, but rewarding. They're
  optimized for the experienced user rather than the first
  timer. Given that successfully onboarded users may spend
  tens of thousands of hours in the UI over the course of
  their lifetimes, this is just good sense.

* Composability: I'm far from a zealot singing the praises
  of the Unix philosophy, but _most_ terminal apps produce
  output that I can process in some way to get into another
  program. It could be way better, but it's leaps and
  bounds over what I can do on the desktop. Even copying
  text out of a modern web app can be a tricky proposition
  if HTML elements aren't nested optimally.

<figure>
  <p>
    <video controls loop class="overflowing">
      <source src="/assets/interfaces/uncomposable.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    </video>
  </p>
  <figcaption>Modern UIs have next to zero composability.
    Even copying text can be a tricky proposition.
    </figcaption>
</figure>

## The principles of interface design (#interface-principles)

If you ask a web designer about the elements of practical
design in interfaces today (I say _practical_ to
disambiguate from vague design tenets like [Dieter Rams'
ten principles of good design][dieter-rams]), they'd talk
to you about text legibility, intuitiveness, and
whitespace. I'd argue that we're optimizing for the wrong
things. UIs that are pretty and friendly are nice to have,
but the true values of a good interface should be speed
and efficiency to make their users as productive as
possible.

Let's dig into it by looking at the aspirational interface
concept from a great movie: _Minority Report_. [Here's a
video][minority-report] of it in action.

<figure>
  <p>
    <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PJqbivkm0Ms">
      <img src="/assets/interfaces/minority-report.jpg" data-rjs="2" class="overflowing">
    </a>
  </p>
  <figcaption>A futuristic and unrealistic concept interface:
    the computer waits on the human instead of the human
    waiting on the computer.</figcaption>
</figure>

I think we can all agree that the interface of this
prospective future is incredible and desirable, but if we
drill into it, what's its most amazing aspect?

Years ago, I might have said that it was the wafer thin
screens. Or the incredible touch technology. But we have
both of those things now! In fact, what we have today is
_better_; we can display more than two colors on screen!
Far superior to anything they seem to have in Philip K.
Dick's dystopian future.

Today, by far the most amazing aspect is that it's an
interface that's keeping up to its user. Instead of waiting
on the computer to think about some text completion, show
him an animation because he's switching an app, or start up
a program, it's keeping up with everything he tells it do
in real time. The computer waits on the human rather than
the other way around. Besides terminals and a few other
pieces of fringe technology, modern UIs don't even come
close to a future this fantastic.

A successful interface isn't one that looks good in a still
screenshot, it's one that maximizes our productivity and
lets us _keep moving_. Legibility and whitespace are great,
but they're of vanishing unimportance compared to speed and
responsiveness.

## The road ahead (#the-road-ahead)

Neither a terminal nor today's web apps are what the future
should look like, but the terminal is closer.

Unfortunately, terminals also _suck_. Although better than
the alternative in many ways, they've failed to keep up
with any advancements from the last thirty odd years.
Here's a few places where terminals could stand to be
inspired by web technology:

* Rich media elements: images, videos, tabulated results,
  etc. The terminal has needed an answer to these since
  1985, but still doesn't have one.

* Fonts. Monospace is the best family of fonts for
  programming, but is objectively terrible for reading. We
  should be able to mix fonts within a single terminal
  interface for optimal legibility.

* Whitespace and line-height: used in moderation, these do
  help make UI elements more distinctive and text more
  legible.

Terminals also need a lot of other things before they're
ever going to a plausible interface replacement for most
people. UI elements that aren't built around ASCII bar
characters for example.

We need a reboot. We need toolkits that produce interfaces
that are fast, consistent, bug free, and composable _by
default_ so that good interfaces aren't just something
produced by the best developer/designers in the world, but
could be reasonably expected from even junior people in the
industry.

We should be honest with ourselves and call out design
anti-patterns that promote flashiness at the expense of
efficiency.

We should stop babying our users and try to raise beginners
and the less technical to the bar of modern day power users
rather than produce software that's designed for the lowest
common denominator. We need more applications like Vim,
Emacs, and Irssi that push their users to improve and pay
huge dividends to those who are willing to make the effort,
and we need to train people to use them.

We should build networked applications that cache content
and make network fetches asynchronously to remote APIs so
that humans aren't waiting for data to come back over the
wire while they're working.

There's a future out there where our software makes
everything from filing a bug to paying off your credit card
fast and efficient, but the path that we're on today isn't
it.

[1] Fans of Qt (and maybe others) will vehemently disagree
    that there's never been a good cross platform UI
    library. I'd argue that SDKs like Qt were never quite
    accessible enough and never produced good enough
    results to be suitable for universal adoption.

[dieter-rams]: https://www.vitsoe.com/us/about/good-design
[minority-report]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PJqbivkm0Ms
