---
title: WGT 2015 Abstract
published_at: 2015-05-29T13:34:59Z
image: https://farm8.staticflickr.com/7709/17437946353_07fc1ffd05_b.jpg
---

This year I attended the Wave-Gotik-Treffen in Leipzig for the third time. I
[wrote about it previously in 2014](/fragments/wgt) and already did a [rough
pass in too much detail of this year's festival][dump]. As usual, it was an
incredible show. The organizers assembled a great line-up of artists and the
attendees brought their A game in the wardrobe department. The shift in attire
alone is enough to pull you into an alternate world of dark elegance and somber
contemplation of life for four days.

My favorite acts were Jo Quail, Eluveitie, and L.E.A.F., two of which I'd never
heard of before which goes to show the potential of serendipitous discovery at
this kind of festival. I'm still a little upset that I missed Qntal playing at
the Schauspielhaus (Leipzig's theatre), which I'm sure would have been an
absolutely incredible show. The festival's biggest letdown may have been the
change in venue of the gothic ballroom party of Dunkelromantischer Tanz
(although disappointment is relative here, it was still incredible).

This year I sprung for a room at one of Leipzig's fancier hotels, the
Grandhotel Steigenberger, mostly because I was actually organized enough to
pick it up early this year, and the weak Euro made it affordable. Its location
right next to the Alte Handelsbörse inside the mitte was probably worth it
alone, but the all-around great service otherwise would have otherwise.

One modest objective I have for the next year is to try and engage more with
the English-speaking group of attendees. Various dead sites online like the
English section of the official WGT forum and threads from various subreddits
make this group a little hard to find, but I've recently discovered that there
is a quite an active community within the [Sadgoth Facebook
group][sadgoth].

The canonical WGT time keeping holiday of [Whitsun][whitsun], which falls 50
days after easter, puts the 2016 edition of the festival from the 13th to the
16th of May. I'm looking forward to it already.

[dump]: /fragments/wgt-2015-brain-dump
[sadgoth]: https://www.facebook.com/groups/241641551227/
[whitsun]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whitsun
