---
title: "Tweeting for 10,000 Years: An Experiment in
  Autonomous Software"
published_at: 2018-06-18T15:35:11Z
location: San Francisco
hook: Using the principles of a 10,000 year clock to build
  a program that's intended to run for a very long time.
---

Deep inside a Texas mountain, a clock is being built.
Unlike other clocks, this one is designed for longevity on
a scale that's incomprehensible to the designers of similar
apparatuses. The counterweight for its drive mechanism is
housed in a hollowed out shaft that's 500 feet high and 12
feet in diameter and weighs an unbelievable 10,000 pounds.
The periodic chimes it plays are controlled by 20 huge
horizontal gears, each of which is 8 feet in diameter. Its
timing is controlled by a 6-foot pendulum assembly
terminating with football-sized titanium weights. It swings
as unhurriedly as one might imagine, taking a full ten
seconds to move back and forth. Components have been
machined to within tolerances of a fraction of an inch,
rather than thousandths, so that they'll keep working
despite inevitable entropic damage caused by the likes of
expansion and rust.

!fig src="/assets/10000-years/orrery.jpg" caption="The design of the orrery to be used in the 10,000 year clock. It shows the relative position of six human-eye visible planets in our solar system."

If all goes well, the clock will keep time for 10,000
years. It's called "[Clock of the Long Now][clock]", and is
a project of the [Long Now Foundation][longnow], who aim to
provide a counterpoint to today's accelerating trend
towards an ever shortening attention span in society by
fostering long-term planning and responsibility. They
consider long thinking to be on the centuries scale and
beyond, and their aim is to to construct frameworks that
will be functional for 10,000 years. As a reminder of this
charter, the Long Now represents years in five digits
instead of four -- to them, it's the year 02018.

## Tweeting as long as possible (#tweeting)

Software isn't as well suited to operate on these sorts of
grand scales, but our industry is reliably short-sighted
when it comes to building products that will last, and we
could stand to be inspired by the work being done on the
10,000 year clock.

I wanted to write a little experiment that reuses some of
the clock's design principles to see how long I could make
a simple program last without my intervention. I [built
one][perpetual] that will post a total of ten pre-written
tweets to my timeline on something close to an exponential
scale, with the last one optimistically schedule to fire
10,000 years from now. The first of them went out just a
few minutes after this article was published.

TODO: Screenshot of tweet.

Each tweet, or "interval", is prefixed with a magic string
and number like **LHI001** (LHI stands for "long heartbeat
interval") so that the scheduled tweets are recognizable,
and so that the program can easily find the last one that
it published. Here's the intended timeline for publication:

<figure>
  <div class="table-container">
    <table class="overflowing">
      <tr>
        <th>Interval #</th>
        <th>Tweet prefix</th>
        <th>Scheduled time</th>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">0</td>
        <td align="center">LHI000</td>
        <td align="center">Today</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">1</td>
        <td align="center">LHI001</td>
        <td align="center">1 day (from now)</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">2</td>
        <td align="center">LHI002</td>
        <td align="center">1 week</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">3</td>
        <td align="center">LHI003</td>
        <td align="center">1 month</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">4</td>
        <td align="center">LHI004</td>
        <td align="center">1 year</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">5</td>
        <td align="center">LHI005</td>
        <td align="center">5 years</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">6</td>
        <td align="center">LHI006</td>
        <td align="center">10 years</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">7</td>
        <td align="center">LHI007</td>
        <td align="center">100 years</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">8</td>
        <td align="center">LHI008</td>
        <td align="center">1,000 years</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td align="center">9</td>
        <td align="center">LHI009</td>
        <td align="center">10,000 years</td>
      </tr>
    </table>
  </div>
  <figcaption>The scheduled publication time for each tweet/interval.</figcaption>
</figure>

Here's the code that checks whether Twitter should be
updated (somewhat simplified for succinctness):

``` go
func Update(api TwitterAPI, intervals []*Interval, now time.Time)
        (int, error) {

    it := api.ListTweets()

    for it.Next() {
        lastTweet = it.Value()

        id, ok = extractIntervalID(lastTweet.Message)
        if ok {
            break
        }
    }

    if it.Err() != nil {
        return -1, it.Err()
    }

    var nextIntervalID int
    if ok {
        // Pick the next interval in the series
        nextIntervalID = id + 1
    } else {
        // If ok is false, we never extracted an interval ID, which
        // means that this program has never posted before. Pick the
        // first interval ID in the series.
        nextIntervalID = 0
    }

    if nextIntervalID >= len(intervals) {
        return -1, nil
    }

    interval := intervals[nextIntervalID]

    if interval.Target.After(now) {
        fmt.Printf("Interval not ready, target: %v\n", interval.Target)
        return -1, nil
    }

    tweet, err := api.PostTweet(
        formatInterval(nextIntervalID, interval.Message))
    if err != nil {
        return -1, err
    }

    return nextIntervalID, nil
}
```

## Time and scale (#time)

It's a fun idea, but as you may have already surmised, my
program won't be tweeting for 10,000 years, and it'll be
very lucky if it even makes it to 100 years (see
[Existential threats](#threats) below). Humans tend to have
a hard time imagining increasing orders of magnitude in a
well-documented phenomenon called [scope
insensitivity][insensitivity]; we can all easily do the
arithmetic that tells us there are 1,000 ten year segments
in 10,000, but it's difficult to appreciate how much more
time that really is. To our minds, ten thousand, a million,
ten million, and so on are all just _really big numbers_.

Consider that the oldest pyramid, the Pyramid of Djoser at
Saqqara, isn't quite 5,000 years old, and that's _ancient_.
As young Cleopatra, and who lived contemporaneously with
some of history's other most famous figures like Julius
Caesar, Mark Antony, and Augustus, looked up the huge stone
monuments that were her country's legacy, consider that
they'd been constructed further back in history for her
(she was born 69 BC) than she is back in history for us in
2018. We have a few human artifacts from as far back as
10,000 years ago, but they mostly amount to fragments
of pots.

But just because the program is unlikely to succeed on its
10,000 year mission doesn't mean that we can't apply
principles for long term thinking to improve its chances.

!fig src="/assets/10000-years/monolith.jpg" caption="We have many artifacts from ancient humanity, but 10,000 years predates almost all of them."

## Hedging against failure (#hedging)

The program's goal for longevity is extremely ambitious, so
it's engineered with a number of features that aim to make
it as minimally prone to failure as possible:

* It runs on a **serverless** architecture, so it's well
  insulated against failures in underlying infrastructure
  like if a single server were to die. That infrastructure
  will also get regular updates for security and stability.

* I'm running it on **AWS Lambda**, a service provided by a
  big company (Amazon) that's likely to be long-lived, and
  has a history of _not_ retiring products and making
  relatively few breaking changes.

* It contains **no persistent state** of its own and
  instead relies entirely on state returned from Twitter's
  API. Databases are especially prone to aging and
  operational problems, and not including one improves the
  program's chances.

* In the spirit of [production minimalism](/minimalism),
  there are **very few moving parts**: just the program
  itself, Twitter's API, and the underlying serverless
  infrastructure.

* **I'm using Go**. As described in [Go on
  Lambda](/go-lambda#tenacity), its 1.x series has a
  remarkable history of longevity and near perfect
  backwards compatibility. Even if Go 2 were to be
  released, I expect that there's a good chance that my
  program would be compatible.

* Relatedly, Go is a **statically typed language** which
  means that the code I wrote is more likely to actually
  work (compared to interpreted languages where many
  problems are only found at runtime). I've also written a
  **comprehensive test suite**.

* The program compiles down to a **self-contained
  binary**, so it won't be broken by changes to its
  bootstrap or dependencies (compared to say Ruby, where an
  eventual upgrade to Bundler could mean that your program
  no longer starts).

## Existential threats (#threats)

Over this kind of timeline, the program faces many
existential threats. One of them will knock it offline
eventually, the only question is: which one?

* Maybe the most common of all failures is an
  **application bug**. I've tried to protect against this
  pitfall through testing, but I could've easily overlooked
  a subtle edge case.

* Changes in **Twitter's API** could spell the end. Say
  that they introduce a backwards incompatible change like
  a new required parameter, shift in the structure of
  responses, or change in how applications authenticate.

* Relatedly, changes in **Twitter's product** might also
  torpedo the operation. Say they move to a new pricing
  model, remodel the core architecture of their product, or
  fold as a company.

* Risks on **AWS** are similar. There's a minimal API that Go
  programs on Lambda use to communicate with the service,
  and that could change. The Lambda product could be
  retired. I've set up the program to be able to run only
  on free tier, but that could change, or the account its
  running under could become delinquent for some other
  reason.

* If left running long enough, **the binary** I've upload
  to Lambda might become incompatible with the underlying
  virtual and hardware infrastructure, or with the
  operating systems low level APIs. It would need to be
  recompiled with a newer version of Go to work again.

I'm personally betting that changes in Twitter's API will
be what takes the program down in the end. It's been stable
for some time, but it's accumulated its share of rough
edges over the years. It stands to reason that the company
will eventually undertake a project to revitalize it, and
that will likely spell the end of the current API after a
deprecation period (which will be a maximum of a few
years).

## What we can learn from a clock (#learn)

The 10,000 year clock was built with [these
principles][principles] guiding its design:

* **Longevity:** The clock should be accurate even after
  10,000 years, and must not contain valuable parts (such
  as jewels, expensive metals, or special alloys) that
  might be looted.

* **Maintainability:** Future generations should be able
  to keep the clock working, if necessary, with nothing
  more advanced than Bronze Age tools and materials.

* **Transparency:** The clock should be understandable
  without stopping or disassembling it; no functionality
  should be opaque.

* **Evolvability:** It should be possible to improve the
  clock over time.

* **Scalability:** It should be possible to build working
  models of the clock from table-top to monumental size
  using the same design.

### Rethought for software (#software)

The Long Now describes these principles as "generally good
for designing anything to last a long time," and they are,
even when it comes to software. It doesn't take much
creativity to rethink them as a set of values that could
help guide our industry. I'd phrase them like this:

* **Longevity:** Software should be written as robustly
  as possible to maximize its chances at longevity.
  Consider edge cases, test comprehensively, use statically
  typed languages, and avoid dependencies that are complex
  or brittle.

* **Maintainability:** Use frameworks that will make it
  easily maintainable by developers who come after you.
  Development should only require a minimal toolchain, and
  one that's shown a good history of stability.

* **Transparency:** Write code simply and elegantly. Use
  abstractions, but don't use abstractions that are so
  heavy that they obfuscate. It should be obvious how it
  works not only to you, but for any others who might read
  it in the future.

* **Evolvability:** It should be possible to improve the
  software over time. A good compiler and test suite should
  let future developers who aren't deeply familiar with the
  existing code to make those improvements safely.

* **Scalability:** To ensure that production software
  will work properly, write an extensive test suite and
  deploy the prototype in high-fidelity pre-production
  environments before taking it live.

[clock]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clock_of_the_Long_Now
[insensitivity]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scope_neglect
[longnow]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Long_Now_Foundation
[perpetual]: https://github.com/brandur/perpetual
[principles]: http://longnow.org/clock/principles/
