---
title: A Short and Practical Guide to Raw Denim
published_at: 2018-08-03T03:08:39Z
location: San Francisco
hook: TODO
---

I've been reading a lot about denim lately. The interest
started when I first read W. David Marx's excellent book
[Ametora][ametora] about the intertwining relationship
between American and Japanese styles, and continued over
the years I've tried to find the perfect pair of jeans.

The rabbit hole of raw denim is a deep one -- there's a
huge subculture of aficionados online who have strong
feelings about what brands to buy, how to produce the best
fades, and how to wash (don't go anywhere near a washing
machine). A little like vinyl, a lot of the claimed
benefits aren't very material, but there's still a lot to
like about the somewhat romanticized world.

While looking around I found a wealth of information, but
no resource that did a very good job of collating the key
ideas in one place, so I've taken a short break from my
usual content to put this one together.

## An overly brief history (#history)

Jacob W. Davis invented the precursor to blue jeans that we
know well today in Nevada in 1873. Pants weren't very
durable at the time, and this would cause problems for
labourers who'd put them through a lot of stress. The wife
of a local woodworker had come in to request pants that
were strong enough to last while her husband was chopping
wood. In a moment of inspiration, Davis made some denim
pants and used some copper rivets that had been lying
around to fasten the pockets (a touch still found on the
vast majority of jeans sold today).

His invention proved quite popular -- more popular than
what he could supply, so he broached a deal with a dry good
wholesaler who had been supplying his denim to help ramp up
production. The name of that wholesaler was Levi Strauss &
Co.

Blue jeans spread east across the country, beyond labourers
and up into the middle class, and migrated across oceans.
Today, jeans are the garment of choice throughout the
world, with over a billion sold every year, and worn in
every country on Earth.

### Japan (#japan)

One doesn't get far into reading about denim before seeing
Japan's outsized influence on the craft.

Japan buying looms:

https://www.kaufmann-mercantile.com/field-notes/post/6030/denim

> Deemed archaic, costly and time consuming, denim mills stopped making selvage denim in the 1950s, but the transition was a couple of decades in the making. Wider shuttle looms were introduced in the ’30s, and by the ’50s much of the weaving was done on 42-inch projectile looms. They were faster, but produced a looser denim, one that would tear, fray and fade. Even the use of indigo — the very color of denim — was axed from the production process. Indigo was limited and expensive, so naturally the mills sought a chemical dye that was effective yet cheap. Sulfur dye was introduced, and color loss accelerated. Selvage denim all but disappeared on the garment trail.

> By the ’60s and ’70s, countries from Belgium to Germany to Japan, began outranking American denim mills in quality, reproducing narrow shuttle loom models that were superior to the original American selvage machines. The ancient machines, however, had a lack of precision in the cast iron and harness springs that gave the resulting bolt of selvage a beautiful character. These subtle imperfections were impossible to reproduce.

> Sensing an opportunity, the Japanese bought many of the old machines from American mills in the 1980s. It probably seemed like a good idea to the American manufacturers at the time. Many of these looms were just rusting out in the fields or scrapped for parts — the old behemoths were taking up too much space in the factories.

## The properties of denim (#properties)

### Raw (dry) denim (#raw)

> These mean the same thing. The denim was not factory washed, and sometimes not singed which leaves the denim looking "hairy". The dye is generally dark and even, so that you can fade them yourself. The jeans probably contain some amount of starch that will rinse off in the wash and soften over time. This is to keep it rigid so that creases set in and make cool fades.

> Sanforized jeans (most jeans) will not shrink a crazy amount in the wash. They'll lose maybe 1" or 1.5" in the waist and inseam.

> Honeycombs: These are the creases behind your knees. They can get some great contrast with raw denim.

> Whiskers: These are the creases the form on your lap. They're a bit tougher to get contrast in, but give jeans good character if you do.

### Washing (#washing)

Many wait as long as possible to maximize the contrast between indigo and fades.

Wash by themselves to avoid indigo transfer.

Soak for 30-45 minutes.

Tubs on the street in Tokyo.

### Selvedge (#selvedge)

!fig src="/assets/denim/shuttle-loom.jpg" caption="How a shuttle loom weaves warp and weft yarns together."

> Up until the 1950s, almost all denim was produced on Shuttle Looms. A shuttle loom is a weaving textile loom which uses a small device called a shuttle to fill in the weft yarns by passing back and forth between both sides of the loom. This leaves one continuous yarn at all the edges so the fabric self seals without any stray yarns.

> Most shuttle looms create a textile that is about 36 inches across. This size is just about perfect for placing those selvedge seams at the outside edges of a pattern for a pair of jeans. This placement isn’t just aesthetically pleasing, but practical as well as it saves whoever’s sewing the jeans a couple extra passes on the overlock machine and ensures the jeans will not fray at the outseam.

> The demand for more denim after WWII, however, soon forced mills to adopt mass-production technology. A shuttle loom can place about 150 weft yarns per minute on a 36 inch wide textile. A Projectile Loom, however, can place over 1000 weft yarns per minute on a textile that’s twice as wide, thus producing nearly 15 times more fabric in the same time span.

> The projectile loom achieves its speed by firing individual (and unconnected) weft yarns across the warp. This is a much more efficient way to weave fabric, what’s lost though is that cleanly sealed edge. Non-selvedge denim produced by projectile looms has an open and frayed edge denim, because all the individual weft yarns are disconnected on both sides.

https://www.heddels.com/2011/03/the-rundown-on-selvedge-denim-what-is-it-all-about/

> This is the edge of denim fabric as produced on a shuttle loom. It is commonly used in the outseam and details of higher end jeans. The outseam may resist fraying, but selvedge itself has no significant impact on denim durability.

> Selvedge used to be a general indicator of quality, but that doesn't mean that all jeans with selvedge are better than jeans without.

#### IDs (#ids)

> Those colored lines on the outside edge are called Selvedge IDs as they used to indicate which mill produced the denim. Cone Mills in North Carolina had a red id, whereas Amoskeag Mills up in New Hampshire had a green id. Nowadays, most selvedge ids are used purely for decorative and ornamental purposes, but a few of the old mills live on.

### Weight (#weight)

> A 10oz jean is lightweight, and will breathe in the summer. A 21oz jean is heavy, and will not be fun to wear if it gets hot where you live.

### Right-hand versus left-hand twill (#right-left)

> When you weave together cotton warp yarn and white cotton filling yarn you get a 90 degree diagonally interwoven pattern called twill.

Right-hand tends to be rougher than left-hand, but other
properties of the jean will be far more important in
deciding this.

### Chainstitching (#chainstitching)

!fig src="/assets/denim/union-special.jpg" caption="The famed Union Special sewing machine."

> Different style of stitching used in premium denim's that creates a more obvious roping effect on the hem than the standard lock stitch. It isn't as strong as a lock-stitch, but roping can be desirable for aesthetic value or to emulate early 20th century style production.

#### Union Special (#union-special)

> However in the 1960’s Japanese denim manufacturers started aquiring these machine. In 1989, when Union Special stopped manufacturing them, it created a void in the market place for the ‘classic look’. Specialty denim shops in North America began trying to buy them up but the Japanese had effectively beaten them to the punch.

### Slubbiness (#slubbiness)

> According to thefreedictionary.com, “slub” in the textile industry is “a soft thick nub in yarn that is either an imperfection or purposely set for a desired effect“.  In terms of raw denim, it is when the denim manufacturer accidentally or intentionally causes irregularities in the yarn by means of knotting or twisting or using a mixture of different fiber lengths.  The effect is an uneven, bumpy, hairy, and rough texture; making for even raw-er denim (although many denim heads prefer the smoother and flatter alternative).

## Interesting places (#places)

## Brands (#brands)

### Pure Blue Japan (#pure-blue-japan)

> Pure Blue Japan has a unique production method utilizing a low tension machine, resulting in a slubby, and rough feeling denim. What is particularly special about their production is that most of their denim rolls off a single machine. A machine&nbsp;which has been adjusted to output fabric which features an uneven and&nbsp;hairy weave. This, coupled with the fact that they only produce through the oldest and finest mills in Okayama, has allowed Pure Blue Japan to&nbsp;produce some of the best quality vintage jeans for denim aficionados&nbsp;for the past fifteen years.

[ametora]: https://www.amazon.com/Ametora-Japan-Saved-American-Style/dp/0465059732
