+++
hook = "Reflecting on whether this habit that's become compulsive has been worth the time."
published_at = 2019-03-18T16:34:20Z
title = "1,000 days of counting Calories"
+++

I've written a few times previously [about][p01]
[counting][p02] [Calories][p03]. I originally figured that
I'd keep it up for a few months then quit, but I just never
really stopped, and recently passed 1,000 days of
consecutive counting.

So has it been worth the effort? Maybe. Something (probably
obvious) I've come to realize over the years is that just
keeping the record doesn't help at all with weight loss,
but it's a valuable tool for building the awareness needed
for it.

It's too easy to cheat otherwise, where you don't fully
count the little snacks that accumulate throughout the day,
or how many days of wanton surplus you've had in a row,
or of the magnitude of those surpluses. You can still cheat
even when you are counting, but at least the information is
visible, so it tends to keep you a little more honest.

The most useful thing I learnt is that if you're going for
weight loss, build in a safety margin. To keep a regular
downtrend on weight I couldn't get away with just hitting
my goal of zero net, I had to run regular deficits in the
hundreds of Calories a day. I was either regularly
underestimating the amount of energy in food,
overestimating how much I was burning during exercise, or
both.

After combining counting with a more strict exercise regime
and a commitment to run much more regular deficits, the
system's finally working for me again, and I'm down about
20 lbs. from my steady state in 2019. It's taken a
concerted effort to push on all those fronts to make it
happen though -- unsurprisingly, punching a few numbers
into an app isn't enough.

[p01]: /fragments/calorie-counting
[p02]: /fragments/six-weeks
[p03]: /fragments/one-year
