---
title: Google Domains
published_at: 2015-05-17T03:29:55Z
hook: UNWRITTEN. This should not appear on the front page.
---

I just moved a few of my domains over to [Google's new Domains
service](https://domains.google.com) to try out the new product. Until now I'd
been using NameCheap for registration, having switched from GoDaddy a few years
previously after my willingness to tolerate their trademark terrible UX fell
behind by my unwillingness to pay what other registrars were asking[1].

For a .org domain, Google's sticker price of $12 is cheaper than NameCheap if
you account for private registration, a feature that's free with Google.
NameCheap charges $11.48 for the domain and $2.88 for the privacy for a total
of $14.36. NameCheap however is a known purveyor of frequent discount codes, so
a savvy Internet consumer may be able to knock a few bucks off of that.

When I arrived, NameCheap's UI was only incrementally better than GoDaddy's in
that it had fewer flashing upsell advertisements, but they'd been improving
steadily over the years. Most recently, they modernized their domain control
panel and it's largely more tolerable now. But even with the improvements,
they're a far shot from Google, whose streamlined interface let me transfer in
domain with a minimal amount of fuss and only necessitated that I fill out on
the order of half a dozen total text boxes.

My favorite Google feature was the DNS import which summarized records in a way
that made them easy to eyeball, but without losing important detail. For
example, it would indicate that it found "website settings" for A and CNAME
records, but would also list the corresponding names of those records. Another
nice touch is that it wraps up the big chunk of MX records required for a
Google Apps configuration as just "Google Apps", conveniently keeping most of
that off your screen by default.

![Google Domains import step](/assets/google-domains/google-domains-import.png)

I did run into a couple small bugs involving Google not being able to fetch
information for a domain, but was able to bypass them by refreshing a few
minutes later. It's still considered a beta product so I was expecting a few
rough edges (although historically the word "beta" doesn't carry much meaning
with Google, so it's hard to say how mature they consider the service to be).

Google already had me with their great UX and transparent pricing model, but
even without that I might have switched anyway just to minimize the number of
merchants who are holding my credit card number. For the time being, they've
got my business.

[1] GoDaddy had also caught themselves up on the wrong side of the latest bout
of fighting of the war of net neutrality, which further accelerated my move.
The exact details of that are lost to history though.
