---
title: Patronage in the age of free
published_at: 2017-08-23T08:06:16Z
hook: Thoughts on how to make the creation of high quality
  content on the internet sustainable.
---

The world's changing, and more so for independent creatives
than for the rest of us. If there's one thing that the
internet's provided, it's a glut of every type of media
imaginable. There's already far more free content out there
than any of us could indulge in across many lifetimes. If
you're a content producer, being heard through the noise is
hard; getting paid, even harder.

I listen to a lot of podcasts, read a lot of blogs, and
consume a lot of open-source software. I don't pay for any
it. That's partly because I've grown up expecting content
on the internet to be free, and partly because I just don't
have to. But I'm not blind, and for years I've felt a
foreboding shadow reminding me that if no one pays for the
next generation of quality content, there won't be one. The
internet will be perfectly happy to stay its course towards
a final destination of nothing but cheap tabloids and cat
pictures.

Ads have been a stopgap since the beginning, but technology
is finally killing them. A universal micropayments system
would be great, but it's been tried countless times and
failed on every one of them. More recently, platforms like
Patreon are driving a recurring monthly donations model
that's seeing some uptake (e.g. _Road Work_, _Waking Up_).
I acknowledge that this is probably going to be closer to
what it takes for sustainable creativity, but I'm still not
sure how I feel about setting aside the price of a Netflix
subscription (or two) every month to a single podcast.

I'm thinking of earmarking $50 or $100 monthly and trying
to allocate it roughly based on what I'm consuming. I
figure that's close to what my parents' generation would've
spent on a cable bill and buying music albums on CD and
movies on VHS. I'd especially like to focus on the long
tail of content producers. The internet has an incredible
amplification effect on the top tier of popularity --
Justin Bieber and Taylor Swift could never produce another
album and still be perfectly comfortable _forever_ -- it's
bands who are just now building a little steam but who
otherwise exist in total obscurity that can't make gas
money. We should focus on them first.

I'd love to hear how you think about patronage. Please
[tweet me][twitter] if you've got a good answer.

[twitter]: https://twitter.com/brandur
