---
title: PAX 2016
published_at: 2016-09-13T16:21:19Z
hook: Better known as line-con. Wherein I revisit the infamous video game expo
  after two years away.
---

I attended PAX (Penny Arcade Expo) West [1] for the first time [in
2014](/fragments/pax), and back then tried to be generous in consideration of
my newness to the event. This year I attended again, and have no such qualms:
PAX is a mediocre convention that is as oversubscribed and is it oversold. The
lines were worse than ever before; there isn't a single booth, panel, or event
that you won't be lining up for.

The most popular items like the live session of Acquisitions Incorporated will
necessitate a commitment of 3+ hours of standing in line. More elaborate
publisher-driven events like BioWare's "escape from the room" style challenge
are also 3+ hours. Bethesda's Dishonored 2 Sunday night after party at
Seattle's "Center for Wooden Boats" had a line up around the block of hopefuls
praying to get in, many of whom never saw the inside of the building. Pokemon
fans waited over an hour for the privilege to pay for overpriced plushes with
an official tag. Standard booths with a few demo consoles often had to cap
their line after it had encircled their entire installation. And forget about
attending an even reasonably popular panel unless you got there an hour before
its listed start time.

A pretty standard strategy for most attendees seemed to be to choose a single
event for the day and get up early to get in line for it. A normal itinerary
would then shake out as follows: mornings spent in line nursing a Starbucks
coffee, 1-2 hours around the early afternoon in the event itself, and then
spending the afternoon on the expo floor itself, searching for "swag" that
amounted to branded pens and key rings, and opportunistically looking for any
demo lines that looked to be less than an hour long.

Between ticket price multiplied by hugely oversold quantities, and what
publishers are paying to be there, Penny Arcade must be making a _killing_ off
of PAX. And beside that, you have to appreciate their acumen even more given
that these same downtrodden fans who spent the majority of their weekend in
line, love the abuse.

[1] Now renamed "PAX West" from "PAX Prime" in an attempt to make this main PAX
    event appear less prestigious so as to redirect traffic to its "PAX East"
    and "PAX South", its less attractive peers.
